# 0.10.x - 0.11.0 (not released)

# 0.9.x - 0.10.0

Help needed! I don't have the resources to meaningfully advance this project. Thank
you for all the valuable contributions but I'd appreciate a co-maintainer who
is motivated to put in some time into reviewing PRs, updating docs, fixing bugs, ..

Warning: the `buildRustCrate` argument will be removed soon.
## New "calling convention"

The recommended convention to use `Cargo.nix` files generated by `crate2nix` has
changed. Instead of `callPackage` you know should use import:

```
let cargo_nix = import ./Cargo.nix { inherit pkgs; };
in cargo_nix.workspaceMembers."${your_crate_name}".build
```

The reason is that the deprecated `buildRustPackage` argument gets automatically
supplied from `pkgs.buildRustPackage` by `pkgs.callPackage`. This causes problems
when cross compiling.

This was debugged by @symphorien, thank you!

## New: Enable optional create feature if sub feature was enabled

Enable a feature with the same name of an optional dependency, if the optional
dependency is indirectly enabled by enabling one of its features.

This mimicks the behavior of Cargo which is explained in the note
[here](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/cargo/reference/features.html#dependency-features).

Thank you @pandaman64!

This fixes the following isues:

* (#146)[https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/146]
  Features fail to contain optional dependencies that got enabled indirectly
* (#182)[https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/182]
  Can't build crate with dependency num 0.4.0

## New: Customize test commands

Want to customize your test execution? Use the `testPreRun` and `testPostRun`
crate attributes (next to `runTests`, see
[README.md](./README.md#running-rust-tests)). `crate2nix` executes the
bash snippets in `testPreRun` and `testPostRun` directly before and after the
actual test command, and in the same shell. Some example use-cases include:

* Setting some environment variable that is needed for the test.

* Setting (and then unsetting) the bash `set +e` option to not fail the
  derivation build even if a test fails. This is quite useful if your tests are
  not flaky and you want to cache failures.

Thank you @Fuuzetsu!

# 0.8.x - 0.9.0

Help needed! I don't have the resources to meaningfully advance this project. Thank
you for all the valuable contributions but I'd appreciate a co-maintainer who
is motivated to put in some time into reviewing PRs, updating docs, fixing bugs, ..

## Breaking changes

* Remove long deprecated `root_crate` and `workspace_members` aliases in the generated
  `Cargo.nix` files.

## Enhancements

* [Issue #83](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/83) Supporting depending
  on different versions of the same crate!
* Some strides towards cross-compilation support. Docs missing and would be
  appreciated! Thanks, @Ericson2314, @lopsided98!
* [Experimental out-of-tree support](./out-of-tree-sources.md) -- with no time
  to work further on it :(

## Under the hood

* Test execution is now closer to what `cargo test` does. Thank you, @symphorien!
* Better `direnv` support in the source. Thanks, @Mic92!
* Better support for upcoming nix 3.0. Thanks, @balsoft!
* tests: avoid building two versions of the same crate. Thanks, @andir!
* Remove usages of deprecated `stdenv.lib`. Thanks, @cole-h!

# 0.7.x - 0.8.0

Organizational: @andir is now an additional official maintainer of `crate2nix`.
Welcome!

Breaking change:

* If you are building crates with git dependencies, you will now need to update
  to a recent version of `nixpkgs-unstable`. On the upside, crates in sub
  directories of git repositories will now work!

New features:

* [Issue #53](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/53): Search for
  matching Cargo.toml for git dependencies.
* Running tests is now documented in the README.
* Add `testInputs` to test execution. This allows users to add `buildInputs` to
  the test execution. This might be required as during test execution external
  programs will be called on generated output or in cases where the rust
  application is just a wrapper around some other tool (in some way or another).
* [Issue #47](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/47) Shorter package
  IDs: Use the crate name or the crate name together with the version as package
  ID if that is unique. That shortens the generated files, makes them more
  readable and also strips local paths from the package IDs in most cases. The
  last point means that you do not have an unncessary diff in you generated
  Cargo.nix because someone else was regenerating it.

Under the hood:

* Trimmed down the dependency tree of `crate2nix` itself by disabling some
  features.
* At least some smoke tests for debug functionality.

If you are interested in hacking on `crate2nix` and `buildRustCrate`: There are
now some convenience flags for the `./run_tests.sh` script for offline mode and
running the tests against your own modified version of `nixpkgs`. Check out the
README section "Hacking on `buildRustCrate` in nixpkgs".

# 0.6.x - 0.7.1

New features and improvements:

* Use hashes from Cargo.lock instead of prefetching when available. This should
  work for any crates.io dependency. :)
* Follow up to [Issue #22](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/22) (and
  others) - Handling of "renamed crates". Thanks a lot,@andir!
* Support for multiple binaries from the same crate. Thank you, @kristoff3r!
* [Issue #34](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/34) - Support for git
  prefetching so that repositories with sub modules now work.
  Thank you, @cpcloud!
* [Issue #65](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/65) - Reexpose
  feature selection parameters from `cargo metadata`. This allows to include
  dependencies in the generated build file which are not used for the default
  features. Or to exclude dependencies for features that you do not care about.
* [Issue #67](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/67) - Support for
  additional lib types - in particular, `cdylib`. Thank you, @andir!
  Write a rust library that is used from C code :)
* [Issue #18](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/18) - Optional crate
  unavailable
  Allows building packages that have multiple versions of the same dependency (with different
  targets). In particular the flate2 package now builds.
  Thank you, @cchalmers!
* [Issue #37](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/37) - Conditional
  target expressions for dependencies can now
  also depend on features. Thank you, @cpcloud!
* [Issue #42](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/42) - Some efficiency
  improvements to prevent stack overflows for projects with
  huge dependency trees. Thank you, @jamii!
      * [Issue #90](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/90) There is a follow
        up to this: @nagisa was seeing super-linear instantiation counts and provided
        a flamegraph. @andir proposed a
        [likely fix in nixpkgs](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/79816).
        Thank you!
* Add fuchsia as an unsupported target (ef945396fcb700322b5b5f497a5d243950ed2513 ).
  Thank you, @jamii!
* [Issue #94](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/94): The `defaultCrateOverrides`
  argument to the build file has finally the desired effect again.
* [#75](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/75): Cleanly separate
  internal API by `internal.` attribute path element. Formally, this is no
  breaking change if it only effects private API but still. I will mitigate by
  allowing the old paths for a release and issue a warning.

Thank you to everyone who contributed with awesomely detailed issues, PRs or
otherwise. You are amazing! Please let me know if I forgot something or forgot
to give someone appropriate credit.

For contributors:

* `./run_tests.sh` now makes it easier to prepare your pull requests for review.
* Build artifacts for linux are now properly pushed to
  [eigenvalue.cachix.org](https://eigenvalue.cachix.org/). Adding that cache with cachix will speed
  up your installations and builds. And it speeds up our CI builds via github actions. Shout out to
  @domenkozar and other cachix contributors.
* @alyssais contributed some fixes to the developer scripts, thank you!

Experimental and still undocumented:

* `cargo test`-like test running support! Thank you very much for your great work, @andir!

Heads up! Feel free to discuss these planned changes in future releases with me:

* [#77](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/77): New/better override behavior that
  also allows overriding `buildRustCrate` more easily.
* [#82](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/82): Use a new file name for
  `crate-hashes.json` every time to prevent merge issues.
* [#102](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/102): Convenient support for out-of-tree sources
  (e.g. for nixpkgs)

# 0.6.0 - 0.6.1

Backported escaping fix for target expressions.

# 0.5.1 - 0.6.0

* [Issue #22](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/22) - Support renamed
  crates. Fixed in `buildRustCrate` in nixpkgs and in
  `crate2nix` by PR #24 @danieldk, thanks a lot!
  This is especially awesome because the popular `rand` crate recently made
  use of the "renamed crates" feature and therefore could not be build by
  `buildRustCrate`/`crate2nix` anymore.
* [Issue #15](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/15) - Support
  "overrideCrates" argument for modifying the derivation for
  a crate by name. Common use case, adding additional buildInputs. NixOS comes
  with `[defaultCrateOverrides](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/build-support/rust/default-crate-overrides.nix)`
  for some common packages already. This is what I use in `default.nix` of `crate2nix`
  to add a conditional dependency under Mac OS:

  ```nix
     cargo_nix.rootCrate.build.override {
        crateOverrides = defaultCrateOverrides // {
          cssparser-macros = attrs: {
            buildInputs = stdenv.lib.optionals stdenv.isDarwin [darwin.apple_sdk.frameworks.Security]; };
        };
      };
   ```

   Many thanks to @Profpatsch for pointing to the problem and analyzing it.
* [Issue #43](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/43) - Support
  conditional dependencies using "test" configuration:

  ```toml
  [target.'cfg(test)'.dependencies]
  tracing = { version = "0.1.5", features = ["log"] }
  ```

  When building with `crate2nix`, dependencies will not lead to an error anymore and
  will simply be ignored (since we do not have test support yet). Thanks to
  @andir for the nice minimal example!

Infrastructure:

* I moved the integration tests to tests.nix, they were in rust code before.
* I also now build every push with github actions,
  and cachix/cachix-action. A suggestion from @vbrandl in #44. Unfortunately,
  the rust crates are not cached yet, I think, because they are not in the closure
  of the result. The cachix caches is called "eigenvalue" for now (I might change
  that in the future).

# 0.5.0 - 0.5.1

Don't use ´Cargo.toml´ but ´Cargo.nix´ as default output! Thank you, @tilpner!

 # 0.4.0 - 0.5.0

## Upgrading

* The default output file changed to "./Cargo.toml". Specify "-o ./default.nix" explicitly to retain the old default.

## Resolved issues

* [Issue #10](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/10) - Changing default
  for `-n`/`--nixpkgs-path` to `"<nixpkgs>"` so that it works by default on
  NixOS AND Mac OS.
* [Issue #11](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/11) - Adding optional
  dependencies if any of their features is enabled.
* [Issue #14](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/14) - Only overwrite
  output if explicitly specified as output file.

# 0.3.1 - 0.4.0

## Upgrading

Please change references to `root_crate` to `rootCrate.build` and references to `workspace_members.${crateName}`
to `workspaceMembers.${crateName}.build`. The camel case attribute names are in line with the nixos style guide.
The `.build` suffix allows future versions of `crate2nix` to add other convenient features such as source tarball
packages, docker image derivations, ... The old aliases still work but are deprecated.

## Dynamic feature resolution

The enabled features for a crate now are resolved at build time! That means you can easily override them:

1. There is a "rootFeatures" argument to the generated build file which you can override when calling
   it from the command line:

      ```bash
      nix build -f ....nix --arg rootFeatures '["default" "other"]' rootCrate.build
      ```

2. Or when importing the build file with "callPackage":

      ```nix
      let cargo_nix = callPackage ./Cargo.nix { rootFeatures = ["default" "other"]; };
          crate2nix = cargo_nix.rootCrate.build;
      in ...;
      ```

3. Or by overriding them on the rootCrate or workspaceMembers:

      ```nix
      let cargo_nix = callPackage ./Cargo.nix {};
          crate2nix = cargo_nix.rootCrate.build.override { features = ["default" "other"]; };
      in ...;
      ```

## Internal: nix test runner

For this release, I needed substantial amount of nix code so I created some nix unit tests. They are invoked by
`cargo test` like all other tests and live in the [./templates/nix/crate2nix/tests](./templates/nix/crate2nix/tests)
directory.

## Feedback: What is needed for a 1.0 release?

I would really appreciate your thoughts. Please add comments to issue
[#8](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/8).

# 0.3.0 - 0.3.1

## Bugfixes

* Issue [#5](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/5): Support `libPath` for proc-macro crates.

Thank you @nuxeh for reporting this bug! Again :)

# 0.2.1 - 0.3.0

## Bugfixes

* Issue [#4](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/4): Support for `libName` != `crateName`.

Thank you @nuxeh for reporting this bug!

## Support for dependencies with git sources

Example:

```toml
[dependencies]
"crate2nix" = { git = "https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix" }
```

# 0.2.0 - 0.2.1

* Added comments to the generated nix build file to indicate which attributes are public and unlikely to change.

# 0.1.0 - 0.2.0

## Bugfixes

* While the command line help said that the "crate hashes" would be stored in a file called "crate-hashes.json", it
  actually used the file "crate_hashes.json" by default. This release uses the documented name which means that
  after the update `nix-prefetch-url` might run again.
* Issue [#3](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/3): Do not depend on local channel configuration for shell
  anymore. Instead, we use a recent nixos-unstable because we still need a fix that's not in stable.

## Workspace Support

If `crate2nix` is applied to a workspace, the resulting nix-file will contain a top-level "workspace_members" attribute
set that refers the corresponding top-level crate derivations by name.

## Target-specific dependencies

"cfg(...)" expressions and target triplets such as "i686-pc-windows-gnu" are compiled into nix expressions. Support
should be reasonable but incomplete because e.g. it does not work for processor features. Please let me know if this
causes problems for you!

# 0.1.0

Initial public release.
