README.md, before:

# crate2nix

crate2nix generates [nix](https://nixos.org/nix/) build files for [rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) crates
using [cargo](https://crates.io/).

![tests-nix workflow status](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/workflows/tests-nix/badge.svg)

**Same dependency tree as cargo**: It uses [cargo_metadata](https://github.com/oli-obk/cargo_metadata) to obtain the
dependency tree from cargo. Therefore, it will use the exact same library versions as cargo and respect any locked down
version in `Cargo.lock`.

**Smart caching**: It uses smart crate by crate caching so that nix rebuilds exactly the crates that need to be rebuilt.
Compare that to docker layers...

**Nix ecosystem goodness**: You can use all things that make the nix/NixOS ecosystem great, e.g. distributed/remote builds,
build minimal docker images, deploy your binary as a service to the the cloud with [NixOps](https://nixos.org/nixops/), ...

**Out of the box support for libraries with non-rust dependencies**: It builds on top of the `buildRustCrate`
function from [NixOS](https://nixos.org/) so that native dependencies of
many rust libraries are already correctly fetched when needed. If your library with native dependencies is not yet
supported, you can create an overlay to add the needed configuration to the `defaultCrateOverrides`.

**Easy to understand nix template**: The actual nix code is generated via `templates/build.nix.tera` so you can
fix/improve the nix code without knowing rust if all the data is already there.

Here is a simple example which uses all the defaults and will generate a `Cargo.nix` file:

```bash
# From the project directory.
crate2nix generate
```

Here is a more elaborate example that uses `<nixos-unstable>` as the default `nixpkgs` path and specifies both the path
to the `Cargo.toml` file (`-f`) and the output (`-o`) file explicitly.

```bash
crate2nix generate \
    -n '<nixos-unstable>' \
    -f /some/project/dir/Cargo.toml \
    -o /some/project/dir/crate2nix.nix
```

Use `crate2nix help` to show all commands and options.

## Installation

NOTE: It is only tested on Linux for now!

If you are not running, install a recent version of nix by running `curl https://nixos.org/nix/install | sh` or following
the instructions on [https://nixos.org/nix/](https://nixos.org/nix/).

Then either

```bash
# Install the stable version to your user env (with shell completions):
nix-env -i -f https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/tarball/0.6.1
```

or

```bash
# Start a shell with it (without shell completions):
nix-shell https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/tarball/0.6.1
```

NOTE: You can use [eigenvalue.cachix.org](https://eigenvalue.cachix.org/) to
get prebuilt binaries for linux.

### Development Version (master)

Similarly, you can either

```bash
# Install the stable version to your user env (with shell completions):
nix-env -i -f https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/tarball/master
```

or

```bash
# Start a shell with it (without shell completions):
nix-shell https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/tarball/master
```

If you want to tweak crate2nix, clone the repository and then

```bash
cd crate2nix
nix-shell
# you are in a shell with crate2nix
```

### Nixpkgs Version

This uses a pinned version nixos-unstable because at the time of writing this, it contains a necessary fix.

If that doesn't work for you, you can override the `pkgs` argument, e.g.:

```bash
nix-shell --arg pkgs 'import <nixos> {config = {}; }'
```

## Generating build files

The `crate2nix generate` command generates a nix file. You can specify the output file with `-o`. E.g.

```bash
crate2nix generate -o Cargo.nix
```

generates Cargo.nix from the Cargo.lock in the current directory.

Look at the [./Cargo.nix](./Cargo.nix) file of this project for a non-trivial example. (How meta!)

## Using build files (single binaries)

If your `Cargo.nix` was generated for a single binary crate (i.e. workspace) then the derivation that builds your binary
can be accessed via the `rootCrate.build` attribute. Use this command to build it and make the result available in the result
directory:

```bash
your_crate_name="super_duper"
nix build -f Cargo.nix rootCrate.build
./result/bin/${your_crate_name}
```

Within a nix file (e.g. your manually written `default.nix`), you can access the
derivation like this:

```nix
let cargo_nix = callPackage ./Cargo.nix {};
in cargo_nix.rootCrate.build
```

## Using build files (workspaces)

If your `Cargo.nix` was generated for a workspace (i.e. not a single binary) then the derivation that builds your binary
CANNOT be accessed via the `rootCrate` attribute. There is no single root crate.

Instead, you can conveniently access the derivations of all your workspace members through the `workspaceMembers`
attribute. Use this command to build one of the workspace members and make the result available in the result
directory:

```bash
your_crate_name="super_duper"
nix build -f Cargo.nix workspaceMembers.${your_crate_name}.build
./result/bin/${your_crate_name}
```

Within a nix file (e.g. your manually written `default.nix`), you can access the
derivation like this:

```nix
let cargo_nix = callPackage ./Cargo.nix {};
in cargo_nix.workspaceMembers."${your_crate_name}".build
```

## Dynamic feature resolution

The enabled features for a crate now are resolved at build time! That means you can easily override them:

1. There is a "rootFeatures" argument to the generated build file which you can override when calling
   it from the command line:

      ```bash
      nix build -f ....nix --arg rootFeatures '["default" "other"]' rootCrate.build
      ```

2. Or when importing the build file with "callPackage":

      ```nix
      let cargo_nix = callPackage ./Cargo.nix { rootFeatures = ["default" "other"]; };
          crate2nix = cargo_nix.rootCrate.build;
      in ...;
      ```

3. Or by overriding them on the rootCrate or workspaceMembers:

      ```nix
      let cargo_nix = callPackage ./Cargo.nix {};
          crate2nix = cargo_nix.rootCrate.build.override { features = ["default" "other"]; };
      in ...;
      ```

## Patching crate derivations with `crateOverride`

NixOS comes
with `[defaultCrateOverrides](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/build-support/rust/default-crate-overrides.nix)`
which specifies mostly some additional native `buildInputs` for various popular crates. If you are using a rust crate with
native dependencies which is not yet covered, you can add additional `buildInputs` with the `crateOverride` parameter 
(similar to `features`):

```nix
let myCrateBase = callPackage ./crate2nix/Cargo.nix {};
    myCrate = myCrateBase.rootCrate.build.override {
      crateOverrides = defaultCrateOverrides // {
        funky-things = attrs: { 
          buildInputs = [openssl]; };
      };
    };
```

Or obviously you can use the power of nix to add a dependency conditionally:

```nix
let myCrateBase = callPackage ./crate2nix/Cargo.nix {};
    myCrate = myCrateBase.rootCrate.build.override {
      crateOverrides = defaultCrateOverrides // {
        cssparser-macros = attrs: { 
          buildInputs = stdenv.lib.optionals stdenv.isDarwin [darwin.apple_sdk.frameworks.Security]; };
      };
    };
```

`crateOverrides` are not restricted to buildInputs however. You should also be able to add patches and 
the like! (I didn't try that, though.)

`crateOverrides` are a feature of the underlying `buildRustCrate` support in NixOS that crate2nix uses.

## Known Restrictions

If you feel limited by these restrictions, please do not hesitate to file an issue! That 
gives me a feeling of what is worth working on.

* ~~Before 0.4.x: Only *default crate features* are supported. It should be easy to support a different feature set at
  build generation time since we can simply pass this set to `cargo metadata`. Feature selection during build time is
  out of scope for now.~~
* No support for building and running tests, see [nixpkgs, issue 59177](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/59177).
* ~~Before 0.6.x: [Renamed crates](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/specifying-dependencies.html#renaming-dependencies-in-cargotoml)
  with an explicit `package` name don't work yet.~~
* Since cargo exposes local paths in package IDs, the generated build file also contain them as part of an "opaque"
  ID. They are not interpreted as paths but maybe you do not want to expose local paths in there...
* It does translates target strings to nix expressions. The support should be reasonable but probably not complete - please
  let me know if you hit problems. ~~Before 0.2.x: Filters all dependencies for the *hard-coded "Linux x86_64" target
  platform*. Again, it should be quite easy to support more platforms. To do so completely and at build time (vs build
  generation time) might be more involved.~~
* Git sources are now also supported. ~~Before 0.3.x: Only *local sources* and *crates io* supported. Again, just
  requires some work to resolve.~~
* ~~Before 0.2.x: No support for workspaces.~~

## Feedback: What is needed for a 1.0 release?

I would really appreciate your thoughts. Please add comments to issue
[#8](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/8).

## Runtime Dependencies

crate2nix use `cargo metadata` / `nix-prefetch-url` at runtime so they need to be in the PATH. The default.nix
adds the built-time nix/cargo binaries as fallback to the path.

Currently, crate2nix is only tested with nixos-unstable (the future 19.03) since it depends on some new features
and bug fixes.

## Regenerating Cargo.nix files for tests

If you change `crate2nix` such that it will produce a different output, you may need to regenerate some of the 
Cargo.toml files. Not all `Cargo.toml` files can be generated during test time because crate2nix does not
work in sandboxes in some cases where cargo needs to write to lock files (I should file bugs for this).

The `regenerate_cargo_nix.sh` should do what you want. Additional diffs in packageIds are, unfortunately, expected.

## Project Overview / Terminology

If you want to hack on this, it is useful to know that build file generation is broken up into multiple phases:

1. **cargo metadata**: Calling `cargo metadata` via the `cargo_metadata` crate.
2. **indexing metadata**: Indexing the metadata by package ID to enable easy joining of "Node" and "Package"
  information, resulting in `metadata::IndexedMetadata`.
3. **resolving**: Using the indexed metadata to actually resolve the dependencies and join all needed build information
  into `resolve::CrateDerivation`.
4. **pre-fetching**: Pre-fetching crates.io packages to determine their sha256, see `prefetch` module.
5. **rendering**: Rendering the data via the `build.nix.tera` template, see `render` module.

## Related Projects

* [carnix](https://nest.pijul.com/pmeunier/carnix:master) is already widely used in NixOS itself, yet it failed to
  generate correct builds for my rust projects. After some attempts to fix that, I gave up. That said, big kudos for
  all the work on buildRustCrate and showing the way!
* [cargo-raze](https://github.com/google/cargo-raze) generates `BUILD` files for bazel.

## Contributions

Contributions in the form of documentation and bug fixes are highly welcome. Please start a discussion with me before
working on larger features.

I'd really appreciate tests for all new features. Please run `cargo test` before submitting a pull request.

Feature ideas are also welcome -- just know that this is a pure hobby side project and I will not allocate a lot of
bandwidth to this. Therefore, important bug fixes are always prioritised.

By submitting a pull request, you agree to license your changes via all the current licenses of the project.

Commit message:

Add comment about sub directories in git repositories

README.md, after:

# crate2nix

crate2nix generates [nix](https://nixos.org/nix/) build files for [rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) crates
using [cargo](https://crates.io/).

![tests-nix workflow status](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/workflows/tests-nix/badge.svg)

**Same dependency tree as cargo**: It uses [cargo_metadata](https://github.com/oli-obk/cargo_metadata) to obtain the
dependency tree from cargo. Therefore, it will use the exact same library versions as cargo and respect any locked down
version in `Cargo.lock`.

**Smart caching**: It uses smart crate by crate caching so that nix rebuilds exactly the crates that need to be rebuilt.
Compare that to docker layers...

**Nix ecosystem goodness**: You can use all things that make the nix/NixOS ecosystem great, e.g. distributed/remote builds,
build minimal docker images, deploy your binary as a service to the the cloud with [NixOps](https://nixos.org/nixops/), ...

**Out of the box support for libraries with non-rust dependencies**: It builds on top of the `buildRustCrate`
function from [NixOS](https://nixos.org/) so that native dependencies of
many rust libraries are already correctly fetched when needed. If your library with native dependencies is not yet
supported, you can create an overlay to add the needed configuration to the `defaultCrateOverrides`.

**Easy to understand nix template**: The actual nix code is generated via `templates/build.nix.tera` so you can
fix/improve the nix code without knowing rust if all the data is already there.

Here is a simple example which uses all the defaults and will generate a `Cargo.nix` file:

```bash
# From the project directory.
crate2nix generate
```

Here is a more elaborate example that uses `<nixos-unstable>` as the default `nixpkgs` path and specifies both the path
to the `Cargo.toml` file (`-f`) and the output (`-o`) file explicitly.

```bash
crate2nix generate \
    -n '<nixos-unstable>' \
    -f /some/project/dir/Cargo.toml \
    -o /some/project/dir/crate2nix.nix
```

Use `crate2nix help` to show all commands and options.

## Installation

NOTE: It is only tested on Linux for now!

If you are not running, install a recent version of nix by running `curl https://nixos.org/nix/install | sh` or following
the instructions on [https://nixos.org/nix/](https://nixos.org/nix/).

Then either

```bash
# Install the stable version to your user env (with shell completions):
nix-env -i -f https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/tarball/0.6.1
```

or

```bash
# Start a shell with it (without shell completions):
nix-shell https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/tarball/0.6.1
```

NOTE: You can use [eigenvalue.cachix.org](https://eigenvalue.cachix.org/) to
get prebuilt binaries for linux.

### Development Version (master)

Similarly, you can either

```bash
# Install the stable version to your user env (with shell completions):
nix-env -i -f https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/tarball/master
```

or

```bash
# Start a shell with it (without shell completions):
nix-shell https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/tarball/master
```

If you want to tweak crate2nix, clone the repository and then

```bash
cd crate2nix
nix-shell
# you are in a shell with crate2nix
```

### Nixpkgs Version

This uses a pinned version nixos-unstable because at the time of writing this, it contains a necessary fix.

If that doesn't work for you, you can override the `pkgs` argument, e.g.:

```bash
nix-shell --arg pkgs 'import <nixos> {config = {}; }'
```

## Generating build files

The `crate2nix generate` command generates a nix file. You can specify the output file with `-o`. E.g.

```bash
crate2nix generate -o Cargo.nix
```

generates Cargo.nix from the Cargo.lock in the current directory.

Look at the [./Cargo.nix](./Cargo.nix) file of this project for a non-trivial example. (How meta!)

## Using build files (single binaries)

If your `Cargo.nix` was generated for a single binary crate (i.e. workspace) then the derivation that builds your binary
can be accessed via the `rootCrate.build` attribute. Use this command to build it and make the result available in the result
directory:

```bash
your_crate_name="super_duper"
nix build -f Cargo.nix rootCrate.build
./result/bin/${your_crate_name}
```

Within a nix file (e.g. your manually written `default.nix`), you can access the
derivation like this:

```nix
let cargo_nix = callPackage ./Cargo.nix {};
in cargo_nix.rootCrate.build
```

## Using build files (workspaces)

If your `Cargo.nix` was generated for a workspace (i.e. not a single binary) then the derivation that builds your binary
CANNOT be accessed via the `rootCrate` attribute. There is no single root crate.

Instead, you can conveniently access the derivations of all your workspace members through the `workspaceMembers`
attribute. Use this command to build one of the workspace members and make the result available in the result
directory:

```bash
your_crate_name="super_duper"
nix build -f Cargo.nix workspaceMembers.${your_crate_name}.build
./result/bin/${your_crate_name}
```

Within a nix file (e.g. your manually written `default.nix`), you can access the
derivation like this:

```nix
let cargo_nix = callPackage ./Cargo.nix {};
in cargo_nix.workspaceMembers."${your_crate_name}".build
```

## Dynamic feature resolution

The enabled features for a crate now are resolved at build time! That means you can easily override them:

1. There is a "rootFeatures" argument to the generated build file which you can override when calling
   it from the command line:

      ```bash
      nix build -f ....nix --arg rootFeatures '["default" "other"]' rootCrate.build
      ```

2. Or when importing the build file with "callPackage":

      ```nix
      let cargo_nix = callPackage ./Cargo.nix { rootFeatures = ["default" "other"]; };
          crate2nix = cargo_nix.rootCrate.build;
      in ...;
      ```

3. Or by overriding them on the rootCrate or workspaceMembers:

      ```nix
      let cargo_nix = callPackage ./Cargo.nix {};
          crate2nix = cargo_nix.rootCrate.build.override { features = ["default" "other"]; };
      in ...;
      ```

## Patching crate derivations with `crateOverride`

NixOS comes
with `[defaultCrateOverrides](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/build-support/rust/default-crate-overrides.nix)`
which specifies mostly some additional native `buildInputs` for various popular crates. If you are using a rust crate with
native dependencies which is not yet covered, you can add additional `buildInputs` with the `crateOverride` parameter 
(similar to `features`):

```nix
let myCrateBase = callPackage ./crate2nix/Cargo.nix {};
    myCrate = myCrateBase.rootCrate.build.override {
      crateOverrides = defaultCrateOverrides // {
        funky-things = attrs: { 
          buildInputs = [openssl]; };
      };
    };
```

Or obviously you can use the power of nix to add a dependency conditionally:

```nix
let myCrateBase = callPackage ./crate2nix/Cargo.nix {};
    myCrate = myCrateBase.rootCrate.build.override {
      crateOverrides = defaultCrateOverrides // {
        cssparser-macros = attrs: { 
          buildInputs = stdenv.lib.optionals stdenv.isDarwin [darwin.apple_sdk.frameworks.Security]; };
      };
    };
```

`crateOverrides` are not restricted to buildInputs however. You should also be able to add patches and 
the like! (I didn't try that, though.)

`crateOverrides` are a feature of the underlying `buildRustCrate` support in NixOS that crate2nix uses.

## Known Restrictions

If you feel limited by these restrictions, please do not hesitate to file an issue! That 
gives me a feeling of what is worth working on.

* ~~Before 0.4.x: Only *default crate features* are supported. It should be easy to support a different feature set at
  build generation time since we can simply pass this set to `cargo metadata`. Feature selection during build time is
  out of scope for now.~~
* No support for building and running tests, see [nixpkgs, issue 59177](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/59177).
* ~~Before 0.6.x: [Renamed crates](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/specifying-dependencies.html#renaming-dependencies-in-cargotoml)
  with an explicit `package` name don't work yet.~~
* Since cargo exposes local paths in package IDs, the generated build file also contain them as part of an "opaque"
  ID. They are not interpreted as paths but maybe you do not want to expose local paths in there...
* It does translates target strings to nix expressions. The support should be reasonable but probably not complete - please
  let me know if you hit problems. ~~Before 0.2.x: Filters all dependencies for the *hard-coded "Linux x86_64" target
  platform*. Again, it should be quite easy to support more platforms. To do so completely and at build time (vs build
  generation time) might be more involved.~~
* Git sources are now also supported. Starting with 0.7 sub modules also work.    
  Finding crates in arbitrary sub directories of git sources (which cargo supports!)is not supported, see #53.

## Feedback: What is needed for a 1.0 release?

I would really appreciate your thoughts. Please add comments to issue
[#8](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix/issues/8).

## Runtime Dependencies

crate2nix use `cargo metadata` / `nix-prefetch-url` at runtime so they need to be in the PATH. The default.nix
adds the built-time nix/cargo binaries as fallback to the path.

Currently, crate2nix is only tested with nixos-unstable (the future 19.03) since it depends on some new features
and bug fixes.

## Regenerating Cargo.nix files for tests

If you change `crate2nix` such that it will produce a different output, you may need to regenerate some of the 
Cargo.toml files. Not all `Cargo.toml` files can be generated during test time because crate2nix does not
work in sandboxes in some cases where cargo needs to write to lock files (I should file bugs for this).

`regenerate_cargo_nix.sh` should do what you want. Additional diffs in packageIds are, unfortunately, expected.

## Running tests

`run_tests.sh` will regenerate build files AND run cargo test for you. It will call out to nix to build the
sample projects -- so a considerable number of dependencies will be fetched and built. Consecutive runs
are much faster.

## Project Overview / Terminology

If you want to hack on this, it is useful to know that build file generation is broken up into multiple phases:

1. **cargo metadata**: Calling `cargo metadata` via the `cargo_metadata` crate.
2. **indexing metadata**: Indexing the metadata by package ID to enable easy joining of "Node" and "Package"
  information, resulting in `metadata::IndexedMetadata`.
3. **resolving**: Using the indexed metadata to actually resolve the dependencies and join all needed build information
  into `resolve::CrateDerivation`.
4. **pre-fetching**: Pre-fetching crates.io packages to determine their sha256, see `prefetch` module.
5. **rendering**: Rendering the data via the `build.nix.tera` template, see `render` module.

## Related Projects

* [carnix](https://nest.pijul.com/pmeunier/carnix:master) is already widely used in NixOS itself, yet it failed to
  generate correct builds for my rust projects. After some attempts to fix that, I gave up. That said, big kudos for
  all the work on buildRustCrate and showing the way!
* [cargo-raze](https://github.com/google/cargo-raze) generates `BUILD` files for bazel.

## Contributions

Contributions in the form of documentation and bug fixes are highly welcome. Please start a discussion with me before
working on larger features.

I'd really appreciate tests for all new features. Please run `cargo test` before submitting a pull request.

Feature ideas are also welcome -- just know that this is a pure hobby side project and I will not allocate a lot of
bandwidth to this. Therefore, important bug fixes are always prioritised.

By submitting a pull request, you agree to license your changes via all the current licenses of the project.
